DOCSP-9583 builders filters page (#61)
mongodb/docs-java: source/fundamentals/builders/filters.txt

   :class: singlecol

.. _filters-builders:

Overview 
--------
In this guide, we show you how to use **builders** to specify

> **filters** for your queries.

Reviewer: I think we should point out some of the places where filters are actually used, e.g.

* find
* match stage of aggregate
* findAndDelete/findAndUpdate/findAndReplace
* countDocuments
* distinct
* deleteOne/deleteMany
* updateOne/updateMany
* replaceOne

   * - :java-core-api:`lt() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#lt(java.lang.String,TItem)>`
     - values less than a specified value.

   * - :java-core-api:`lte() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#lte(java.lang.String,TItem)>`
     - values less than or equal to a specified value.

   * - :java-core-api:`ne() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#ne(java.lang.String,TItem)>`
     - values not equal to a specified value.

   * - :java-core-api:`in() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#in(java.lang.String,java.lang.Iterable)>`
     - any of the values specified in an array.

   * - :java-core-api:`nin() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#nin(java.lang.String,java.lang.Iterable)>`
     - none of the values specified in an array.

   * - :java-core-api:`empty() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#empty()>`
     - all the documents.

The following example creates a filter that matches all documents where
the value of the ``qty`` field equals "5" in the ``paint_purchases`` collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin equalComparison
   :end-before: end equalComparison
   

> The JSON output renders as the following:

Reviewer: I found this a bit confusing, since the code above doesn't actually render the filter as JSON.  Do you think we should show code that renders the filter?

Author: I thought it would help clarify to the reader what the filter is doing. This was brought up in another PR for me too and I was told we can assume the user has a general understanding and won't need to see what it renders as.  I'll take these out in all sections.

Reviewer: No, I like it and am not saying we should remove.  I was just wondering if we should show a sample of how one would show the rendering oneself.

Reviewer: But if you all decide to remove it I'm ok with that too.

The following shows the output of the query using the operator specified above:
   
.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
      
   { "_id": 8, "color": "orange", "qty": 7, "vendor": ["A", "D"] }

.. _elements:

Elements
--------

The elements operators evaluate the nature of a specified field.

The elements operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Elements Method
     - Matches
      
   * - :java-core-api:`exists() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#exists(java.lang.String)>`
     - documents that have the specified field.

   * - :java-core-api:`type() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#type(java.lang.String,java.lang.String)>`
     - documents if a field is of the specified type.

The following example matches documents that have a ``qty`` field and
its value does not equal "5" or "8" in the ``paint_purchases`` collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin existsComparison
   :end-before: end existsComparison

The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   

>    { "qty" : [ { 

Reviewer: In the 4.0 driver it currently renders as:

    {"$and": [{"qty": {"$exists": true}}, {"qty": {"$nin": [5, 8]}}]}

You can see with this code:

        var filter = and(exists("qty"), nin("qty", 5, 8));
        var doc = filter.toBsonDocument(BsonDocument.class, MongoClientSettings.getDefaultCodecRegistry());
        System.out.println(doc.toJson());

But it's subject to change given bugs like https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/JAVA-4006.  So we may need to mention that.

     - documents when the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. "1").

   * - :java-core-api:`bitsAllClear() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#bitsAllClear(java.lang.String,long)>`
     - documents when the specified bits of a field are clear (i.e. "0").
      
   * - :java-core-api:`bitsAnySet() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#bitsAnySet(java.lang.String,long)>`
     - documents when at least one of the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. "1").
     
   * - :java-core-api:`bitsAnyClear() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#bitsAnyClear(java.lang.String,long)>`
     - documents when at least one of the specified bits of a field are clear (i.e. "0").

The following example matches documents that have a ``bitField`` field
with bits set at positions of the corresponding bitmask "34" (i.e.
"00100010") in the ``binary_numbers`` collection: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin bitsComparison
   :end-before: end bitsComparison

The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
   

>    {  "a": { "$bitsAllSet": [1,5] }}

Reviewer: bitsAllSet("a", 34)

renders as

    {"a": {"$bitsAllSet": 34}}

The following shows the output of the query using the operator specified above:
   
.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
      
   { "_id": 9, "a": 54, "binaryValue": "00110110" }
   { "_id": 12, "a": 102, "binaryValue": "01100110" }

.. _geospatial:

Geospatial
----------

The geospatial operators evaluate a specified coordinate and its
relation to a shape or location. 

The geospatial operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Geospatial Method 
     - Matches
      

>    * - :java-core-api:`geoWithin() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#geoWithin(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson)>`

Reviewer: Even fully expanded, the first column is wrapping to two lines, which looks funny for method names.  Can that be fixed?

     - geometries containing a geospatial data value (GeoJSON or legacy coordinate pairs) that exist within the specified circle, using spherical geometry.

   * - :java-core-api:`geoIntersects() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#geoIntersects(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson)>`
     - geometries that intersect with a GeoJSON geometry. The 2dsphere index supports ``$geoIntersects``.

   * - :java-core-api:`near() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#near(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson,java.lang.Double,java.lang.Double)>`
     - geospatial objects in proximity to a point. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support ``$near``.

   * - :java-core-api:`nearSphere() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#nearSphere(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson,java.lang.Double,java.lang.Double)>`
     - geospatial objects in proximity to a point on a sphere. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support ``$nearSphere``.

The following example creates a filter that matches documents in which
the ``point`` field contains a GeoJSON geometry that falls within

> the given polygon in the ``geo_points`` collection:

Reviewer: Could we link to the Javadoc for Polygon somewhere?

The array operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Array Method
     - Matches
      
   * - :java-core-api:`all() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#all(java.lang.String,java.lang.Iterable)>`
     - documents if the array field contains every element specified in the query.

   * - :java-core-api:`elemMatch() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#elemMatch(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson)>`
     - documents if an element in the array field matches all the specified conditions.
      
   * - :java-core-api:`size() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#size(java.lang.String,int)>`
     - documents if the array field is a specified number of elements.

The following example matches documents with a ``vendors`` array
containing both "A" and "D" in the ``paint_purchases`` collection: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin allComparison
   :end-before: end allComparison
   
The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { "vendor" : { 
      "$all" : { 
         ["A", "D"] 

>          } } }

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: this one is probably short enough to fit on one line. You can also close all the curly braces in a row without a space, e.g. "}}}"

   * - :java-core-api:`near() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#near(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson,java.lang.Double,java.lang.Double)>`
     - geospatial objects in proximity to a point. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support ``$near``.

   * - :java-core-api:`nearSphere() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#nearSphere(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson,java.lang.Double,java.lang.Double)>`
     - geospatial objects in proximity to a point on a sphere. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support ``$nearSphere``.

The following example creates a filter that matches documents in which
the ``point`` field contains a GeoJSON geometry that falls within
the given polygon in the ``geo_points`` collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin geoWithinComparison
   :end-before: end geoWithinComparison

The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
   
   { "point": {
         $geoWithin: {
            $geometry: {
               type: "Polygon",

>                coordinates: [ [[ 0, 0], [4 , 0], [4, 4], [0, 4], [0 , 0] ] ]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
               coordinates: [ [ [ 0, 0], [4 , 0], [4, 4], [0, 4], [0 , 0] ] ]
```

   :class: singlecol

.. _filters-builders:

Overview 
--------
In this guide, we show you how to use **builders** to specify
**filters** for your queries.

Builders are classes provided by the MongoDB Java driver that allow you
to use the builder pattern to interact with your MongoDB instance. The
builders provided by the MongoDB Java driver can improve the readability
of your code.  See the :doc:`Builders

> </fundamentals/builders/>` page for a list of Builders available in the

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: no change required, but I like to keep links (whether external links or directive-based ones) on the same line even if it goes beyond the 80 char width. In this case, I don't think it would even go beyond that width if you kept the Builders link on line 23.

- Items that cost $0 to $25
- A hotel with amenities that include an indoor swimming pool and free parking
- A food critic review that mentions "spicy" 

This guide shows you how to use builders with examples of the following
types of operators: 

- :ref:`Comparison <comparison>`
- :ref:`Logical <logical>`
- :ref:`Arrays <arrays>`
- :ref:`Elements <elements>`
- :ref:`Evaluation <evaluation>`
- :ref:`Bitwise <bitwise>`
- :ref:`Geospatial <geospatial>`

The :java-core-api:`Filters <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html>`
class provides static factory methods for all the MongoDB query
operators. Each method returns an instance of the :ref:`Bson <bson>`
type, which you can pass to any method that expects a query filter. 

.. tip::

   For brevity, you may choose to import all methods of the
   :java-core-api:`Filters <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html>`
   class statically: 

   .. code-block:: java

      import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.*;

   The examples below assume this static import.

The Filter examples in this guide use the following sample collections:

Collection: ``paint_purchases``

.. code-block:: json

>    {"_id": 1, "color": "red", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["A"]}

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: I think I mentioned this in a comment in an earlier review of this PR about consistency of spacing in JSON. Sometimes you have spaces padding the "{" and the first field and spaces padding the "}" field. We should stay consistent.

In case it's helpful, here's a doc that provides some info on how our team decided to do javascript/json formatting:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1vxDasa0S2yrpXfTJkH8VooYBIasiHdOIotQOx_b8xfc/edit#gid=0
I think there's another source for this info, but can't locate it at the moment.

Applies to all the json instances.

     - any of the values specified in an array.

   * - :java-core-api:`nin() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#nin(java.lang.String,java.lang.Iterable)>`
     - none of the values specified in an array.

   * - :java-core-api:`empty() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#empty()>`
     - all the documents.

The following example creates a filter that matches all documents where
the value of the ``qty`` field equals "5" in the ``paint_purchases`` collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin equalComparison
   :end-before: end equalComparison
   
The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { "$eq": { "qty": 5 } }

The following shows the output of the query using the operator specified above:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   {"_id": 1, "color": "red", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["A"]}
   {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}

The following example creates a filter that matches all documents where
the value of the ``qty`` field is greater than or equal to "8" in the

> ``paint_purchases`` collection: 

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: to keep the result set more compact, we could use 10 instead of 8. Then it would only return two results but still demonstrate values equal and greater, and save a couple lines.

The array operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Array Method
     - Matches
      
   * - :java-core-api:`all() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#all(java.lang.String,java.lang.Iterable)>`
     - documents if the array field contains every element specified in the query.

   * - :java-core-api:`elemMatch() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#elemMatch(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson)>`
     - documents if an element in the array field matches all the specified conditions.
      
   * - :java-core-api:`size() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#size(java.lang.String,int)>`
     - documents if the array field is a specified number of elements.

The following example matches documents with a ``vendors`` array
containing both "A" and "D" in the ``paint_purchases`` collection: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin allComparison
   :end-before: end allComparison
   
The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { "vendor" : { 
         "$all" : { 
               ["A", "D"] 

>    } } }

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: I like the placement of the three closing curly braces on one line, but I think this should be indented to match the first curly brace it closes which would be in the same column as "$all".

The following shows the output of the query using the operator specified above:
   
.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
      
   {"_id": 8, "color": "orange", "qty": 7, "vendor": ["A", "D"]}

.. _elements:

Elements
--------

> The elements operators evaluate a specified field.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: I wonder if this description could be more specific. I think "evaluate a specified field" could refer to almost any operator.

     - documents where values contain a specified regular expression.
      
   * - :java-core-api:`text() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#text(java.lang.String)>`
     - documents which contain a specified full-text search expression.
     
   * - :java-core-api:`where() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#where(java.lang.String)>`
     - documents which contain a specified JavaScript expression.

The following example matches documents that have a ``color`` field
starting with the letter "p" in the ``paint_purchases`` collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin regexComparison
   :end-before: end regexComparison

The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { "$regex" : "^p" }

The following shows the output of the query using the operator specified above:
   
.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
      
   {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
   {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}

.. _bitwise:

Bitwise
-------

> The bitwise operators convert a number into it's binary value to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bitwise operators convert a number into its binary value to
```

   * - :java-core-api:`geoWithinBox() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#geoWithinBox(java.lang.String,double,double,double,double)>`
     - documents containing a coordinates value that exist within the specified box.
      
   * - :java-core-api:`geoWithinPolygon() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#geoWithinPolygon(java.lang.String,java.util.List)>`
     - documents containing a coordinates value that exist within the specified polygon.

   * - :java-core-api:`geoWithinCenter() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#geoWithinCenter(java.lang.String,double,double,double)>`
     - documents containing a coordinates value that exist within the specified circle.

   * - :java-core-api:`geoWithinCenterSphere() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#geoWithinCenterSphere(java.lang.String,double,double,double)>`
     - geometries containing a geospatial data value (GeoJSON or legacy coordinate pairs) that exist within the specified circle, using spherical geometry.

   * - :java-core-api:`geoIntersects() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#geoIntersects(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson)>`

>      - geometries that intersect with a GeoJSON geometry. The 2dsphere index supports $geoIntersects.

Reviewer 2: Let's use monospace for operators like "$geoIntersects".

   * - ``regex()``
     - documents where values contain a specified regular expression.
      
   * - ``text()``
     - documents which contain a specified full-text search expression.
     
   * - ``where()``
     - documents which contain a specified JavaScript expression.

The following example matches documents that have a ``color`` field
containing the letter "p" in the ``paint_purchases`` collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin regexComparison
   :end-before: end regexComparison

The BSON renders as:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { "$regex" : "p" }

The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:
   
.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
      
   {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
   {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}

.. _bitwise:

Bitwise
-------

The bitwise operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Bitwise Method
     - Matches
      
   * - ``bitsAllSet()``

>      - documents when the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. 1).

Reviewer 2: Let's use double quotes around values:

```suggestion
     - documents when the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. "1").
```

     
   * - ``bitsAnyClear()``
     - documents when at least one of the specified bits of a field are clear (i.e. 0).

The following example matches documents that have a bitField field
with bits set at positions of the corresponding bitmask 50 (i.e.
00110010) in the ``binary_numbers`` collection: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin bitsComparison
   :end-before: end bitsComparison

The BSON renders as:

.. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
   
   { 
      "a": 
         { 
            "$bitsAllSet": [ 1, 5 ] 
         } 
   }

The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:
   
.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
      
   { _id: 9, a: 54, binaryValue: "00110110" }
   { _id: 12, a: 102, binaryValue: "01100110" }

.. _geospatial:

Geospatial
----------

The geospatial operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Geospatial Method 
     - Matches
      
   * - ``geoWithin()``
     - documents containing a GeoJSON geometry field that falls within within a bounding GeoJSON geometry.

   * - ``geoWithinBox()``

>      - documents containing a grid coordinates field that exist within the specified box.

Reviewer 2: I'm not familiar with the "grid coordinates field" term -- can you point me to where they're referred to as such? Or did you mean just "coordinates", or a specific type like a Point?

Also, I wouldn't say the "field" exists within the specified box but rather the "value" exists. Comment applies to all instances.

      
   * - ``geoWithinPolygon()``
     - documents containing a grid coordinates field that exist within the specified polygon.

   * - ``geoWithinCenter()``
     - documents containing a grid coordinates field that exist within the specified circle.

   * - ``geoWithinCenterSphere()``
     - geometries containing a geospatial data field (GeoJSON or legacy coordinate pairs) that exist within the specified circle, using spherical geometry.

   * - ``geoIntersects()``
     - geometries that intersect with a GeoJSON geometry. The 2dsphere index supports $geoIntersects.

   * - ``near()``
     - geospatial objects in proximity to a point. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support $near.

   * - ``nearSphere()``
     - geospatial objects in proximity to a point on a sphere. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support $nearSphere.

The following example creates a filter that matches documents in which

> the ``point`` field contains a GeoJSON Geometry object that falls within

Reviewer 2: Question: should "Geometry" be capitalized here (I'm not sure)? And is geometry redundant since you specify GeoJSON, or is there a geometry type of GeoJSON?

Author: Just checked in the docs manual and the way it's used there is "GeoJSON geometry"

   :class: singlecol

.. _filters-builders:

Overview 
--------
In this guide, we show you how to use **builders** to specify
**filters** for your queries.

Builders are classes provided by the MongoDB Java driver that allow you
to use the builder pattern to interact with your MongoDB instance. The
builders provided by the MongoDB Java driver can improve the readability
of your code.  See the :doc:`Builders overview page
</fundamentals/builders/>` for a list of Builders available in the Java

> driver. 

Reviewer 2: Let's choose to use either the capitalized or lowercase form of "builders" consistently. 

For the link to "Builders overview page" you might consider using title case, or whatever the text is in the title of that page.

- A food critic review that mentions "spicy" 

This guide shows you how to use builders with examples of the following
types of operators: 

- :ref:`Comparison <comparison>`
- :ref:`Logical <logical>`
- :ref:`Arrays <arrays>`
- :ref:`Elements <elements>`
- :ref:`Evaluation <evaluation>`
- :ref:`Bitwise <bitwise>`
- :ref:`Geospatial <geospatial>`

The :java-core-api:`Filters <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html>`
class provides static factory methods for all the MongoDB query
operators. Each method returns an instance of the :ref:`Bson <bson>`
type, which you can pass to any method that expects a query filter. 

.. tip::

   For brevity, you may choose to import all methods of the
   :java-core-api:`Filters <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html>`
   class statically: 

   .. code-block:: java

      import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.*;

   The examples below assume this static import.

The following sections show you how to use the ``Filters`` class to sort
your queries using the following setup:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin imports

>    :end-before: end imports 

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this section is supposed to show. A number of these imports aren't related to the filters. And we'd only want to show which imports we're using for a specific filter which you've covered by mentioning that they use the static import in the tip.

Collection: ``paint_purchases``

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 1, "color": "red", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["A"]}
   {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
   {"_id": 3, "color": "blue", "qty": 8, "vendor": ["B", "A"]}
   {"_id": 4, "color": "white", "qty": 6, "vendor": ["D"]}
   {"_id": 5, "color": "yellow", "qty": 11, "vendor": ["A", "B"]}
   {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}
   {"_id": 7, "color": "green", "qty": 8,"vendor": ["B", "C"]}
   {"_id": 8, "color": "orange", "qty": 7, "vendor": ["A", "D"]}

Collection: ``binary_numbers``

.. code-block:: json

   { _id: 9, a: 54, binaryValue: "00110110" }
   { _id: 10, a: 20, binaryValue: "00010100" }
   { _id: 11, a: 68, binaryValue: "1000100" }
   { _id: 12, a: 102, binaryValue: "01100110" }

Collection: ``geo_points``

.. code-block:: json

   { _id: 13, "coordinates": { type: "Point", coordinates: [2.0, 2.0] } }
   { _id: 14, "coordinates": { type: "Point", coordinates: [5.0, 6.0] } }
   { _id: 15, "coordinates": { type: "Point", coordinates: [1.0, 3.0] } }
   { _id: 16, "coordinates": { type: "Point", coordinates: [4.0, 7.0] } }

.. _comparison:

Comparison 
----------

> The comparison operator compares the value in a document to a specified value.

Reviewer 2: I think there are two different ways to present each of the operator types that might be better than this. In the current form, it sounds like there is a single "comparison operator", but it is actually a category of several operators which you show in the table below.
One way to resolve this is to refer to the operators in plural form. E.g. "The comparison operators compare..."
Or to identify it as a category. E.g. "The comparison filters include all operators that compare ..."

the value of the ``qty`` field is greater than or equal to "8" in the
``paint_purchases`` collection: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin gteComparison
   :end-before: end gteComparison
   
The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { "$gte": { "qty": 8 } }

The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
   {"_id": 3, "color": "blue", "qty": 8, "vendor": ["B", "A"]}
   {"_id": 5, "color": "yellow", "qty": 11, "vendor": ["A", "B"]}
   {"_id": 7, "color": "green", "qty": 8, "vendor": ["B", "C"]}

The following example creates a filter that matches all documents in
the ``paint_purchases`` collection because the predicate is empty: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin emptyComparison
   :end-before: end emptyComparison

The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { }

> The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:

Reviewer 2: I think the user would get the idea if you mentioned here "The output of the code snippet above consists of all the documents in the collection." and then showed just the first three followed by an ellipsis. That way, we don't need to show all 8 lines to try to explain it.

   
.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
      
   {"_id": 1, "color": "red", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["A"]}
   {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
   {"_id": 3, "color": "blue", "qty": 8, "vendor": ["B", "A"]}
   {"_id": 4, "color": "white", "qty": 6, "vendor": ["D"]}
   {"_id": 5, "color": "yellow", "qty": 11, "vendor": ["A", "B"]}
   {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}
   {"_id": 7, "color": "green", "qty": 8,"vendor": ["B", "C"]}
   {"_id": 8, "color": "orange", "qty": 7, "vendor": ["A", "D"]}

.. _logical:

Logical
-------

> The logical operator looks at the conditions of the specified filters.

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate on this? I'm not sure if I could understand how they function from the description: "looks at the conditions".

   * - :java-core-api:`or() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#or(org.bson.conversions.Bson...)>`
     - documents with the conditions of either filter. This operator joins filters with a logical ``OR``.
      
   * - :java-core-api:`not() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#not(org.bson.conversions.Bson)>`
     - documents that do not match the filter.
     
   * - :java-core-api:`nor() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#nor(org.bson.conversions.Bson...)>`
     - documents that fail to match both filters. This operator joins filters with a logical ``NOR``.

The following example creates a filter that matches documents where
the value of the ``qty`` field is greater than "8" or the value
of the ``color`` field equals "pink" in the ``paint_purchases`` collection: 

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin orComparison
   :end-before: end orComparison
   
The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { 
      "$or" :
      [
         "qty" : { "$gt" : 8 }, 
         "color" : "pink"
      ]       

>    }

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: Unless there's a reason not to, can you make this more compact? Maybe the curly braces could be on the same line and the square braces could be the trailing character on the previous lines.

   :copyable: false
      
   {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
   {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}

.. _bitwise:

Bitwise
-------

THe bitwise operator converts a number into it's binary value to
evaluate its bits.

The bitwise operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Bitwise Method
     - Matches
      
   * - :java-core-api:`bitsAllSet() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#bitsAllSet(java.lang.String,long)>`
     - documents when the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. "1").

   * - :java-core-api:`bitsAllClear() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#bitsAllClear(java.lang.String,long)>`
     - documents when the specified bits of a field are clear (i.e. "0").
      
   * - :java-core-api:`bitsAnySet() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#bitsAnySet(java.lang.String,long)>`
     - documents when at least one of the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. "1").
     
   * - :java-core-api:`bitsAnyClear() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#bitsAnyClear(java.lang.String,long)>`
     - documents when at least one of the specified bits of a field are clear (i.e. "0").

> The following example matches documents that have a ``bitField ``field

Reviewer 2: The formatting breaks here because of the lack of a space after the closing "``"

with bits set at positions of the corresponding bitmask "34" (i.e.

> 00100010) in the ``binary_numbers`` collection: 

Reviewer 2: Should this value be in quotes too?

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin bitsComparison
   :end-before: end bitsComparison

The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
   
   {  "a": { "$bitsAllSet": [1,5] } }

The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:
   
.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
      
   { _id: 9, a: 54, binaryValue: "00110110" }
   { _id: 12, a: 102, binaryValue: "01100110" }

.. _geospatial:

Geospatial
----------

> A geospatial operator evaluates a specified coordinate to a shape or location.

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand "evaluates a specified coordinate to a shape or location". Maybe you meant something like "evaluates a specified coordinate and its relation to a shape or location"?

     - geospatial objects in proximity to a point. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support $near.

   * - :java-core-api:`nearSphere() <com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#nearSphere(java.lang.String,org.bson.conversions.Bson,java.lang.Double,java.lang.Double)>`
     - geospatial objects in proximity to a point on a sphere. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support $nearSphere.

The following example creates a filter that matches documents in which
the ``point`` field contains a GeoJSON geometry that falls within
the given polygon in the ``geo_points`` collection:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/Filters.java
   :language: java
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin geoWithinComparison
   :end-before: end geoWithinComparison

The JSON output renders as the following:

.. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
   
   {
      "point": {
         $geoWithin: {
            $geometry: {
               type: "Polygon",
               coordinates: [ [[ 0, 0], [4 , 0], [4, 4], [0, 4], [0 , 0] ] ]
            }
         }
      }
   }

> The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: I was just thinking that maybe a more clear way to identify what this is could be:
"The following shows the output of the query using the operator specified above:"

documents: 

``paint_purchaces``

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 1, "color": "red", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["A"]}
   {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
   {"_id": 3, "color": "blue", "qty": 8, "vendor": ["B", "A"]}
   {"_id": 4, "color": "white", "qty": 6, "vendor": ["D"]}
   {"_id": 5, "color": "yellow", "qty": 11, "vendor": ["A", "B"]}
   {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}
   {"_id": 7, "color": "green", "qty": 8,"vendor": ["B", "C"]}
   {"_id": 8, "color": "orange", "qty": 7, "vendor": ["A", "D"]}

``binary_numbers``

.. code-block:: json

   { _id: 9, a: 54, binaryValue: "00110110" }
   { _id: 10, a: 20, binaryValue: "00010100" }
   { _id: 11, a: 68, binaryValue: "1000100" }
   { _id: 12, a: 102, binaryValue: "01100110" }

``geo_points``

.. code-block:: json

   { _id: 13, type: "Point", coordinates: [ 2,2 ] }
   { _id: 14, type: "Point", coordinates: [ 5,6 ] }
   { _id: 15, type: "Point", coordinates: [ 1,3 ] }
   { _id: 16, type: "Point", coordinates: [ 4,7 ] }

.. _comparison:

Comparison 
----------

The comparison operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

>    * - Comparison Operator

Reviewer 2: Let's specify that these are methods. What they are equivalent to are called comparison operators like "$eq"

     - Matches
      
   * - ``eq()``
     - values that are equal to a specified value.

   * - ``gt()``
     - values that are greater than a specified value.
      
   * - ``gte()``
     - values that are greater than or equal to a specified value.

   * - ``lt()``
     - values that are less than a specified value.

   * - ``lte()``
     - values that are less than or equal to a specified value.

   * - ``ne()``
     - values that are not equal to a specified value.

   * - ``in()``
     - any of the values specified in an array.

   * - ``nin()``
     - none of the values specified in an array.

   * - ``empty()``
     - all the documents.

> The following code snippet shows how to use a comparison filter:

Reviewer 2: Let's stay consistent with terminology. Prior to this, you've called them "comparison operator methods" and never "comparison filter", so that switch can be confusing to readers.

.. code-block:: java
   
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.*;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>

>    collection.find(<comparison filter>);

Reviewer 2: Looking at this now, I'm not sure this code snippet makes much sense since you show it's usage in the example. This only shows how to use it for `find()`, but you can actually pass it to many other different types of CRUD operations.

.. example::

   The following example creates a filter that selects all documents where
   the value of the ``qty`` field equals ``5`` in the paint_purchaces collection:

   .. code-block:: java
      

>       import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.eq;

Reviewer 2: Earlier, you mentioned that "The examples below assume this [wildcard] static import." so I think this can be confusing. If you remove the sentence about assuming they use the static import, specifying the exact import makes sense. Alternatively, you could consider removing this line but then it can be more confusing to determine which methods come from the wildcard import.

      // <MongoCollection setup code here>

      Bson equalComparison = eq("qty", 5);
      List<Document> results = new ArrayList<>();
      collection.find(equalComparison).into(results);
      for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
      }
   
   The Bson renders as:

>    .. code-block:: none

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: the query operator is expressed in extended json, so we should be ok using the json code highlighting.

      :copyable: false
   

>       {

Reviewer 2: Since what we're showing is a single, short example, could we make the equivalent operator a single line rather than spacing them out over multiple lines?

>          "qty": 20

Reviewer 2: Make sure your example code matches what you write it is equivalent to.

      }

   The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:

   .. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
   
      {"_id": 1, "color": "red", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["A"]}
      {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}

> .. example::

Reviewer 2: Is there a specific reason why you chose "empty" or can we choose something else? Since no filter is equivalent to the empty operator, and it's likely that no filter is used more often, I would use this space to demonstrate something else that might be used more often.

Author: The jira ticket requests for this method to be included

Reviewer 2: Can we show an additional example, perhaps one of the filter builders that uses one or more parameters?

I don't mind keeping this example as well; the linked ticket wasn't specific as to whether to include an example or just the information you included in the table.

   The following example creates a filter that selects all documents in

>    the paint_purchaces collection because the predicate is empty: 

Reviewer 2: I think this is missing some information.  You create a Bson filter, but there's more than that.

   .. code-block:: java
      
      import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.empty

      // <MongoCollection setup code here>

      Bson emptyComparison = empty();
      List<Document> results = new ArrayList<>();
      collection.find(emptyComparison).into(results);
      for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
      }

>    The Bson renders as:

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: although it's not required, let's add an extra linebreak after a code-block to make it easier for us to read the RST.

   .. code-block:: none
      :copyable: false
   
      { }

   The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:
   
   .. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
      
      {"_id": 1, "color": "red", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["A"]}
      {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
      {"_id": 3, "color": "blue", "qty": 8, "vendor": ["B", "A"]}
      {"_id": 4, "color": "white", "qty": 6, "vendor": ["D"]}
      {"_id": 5, "color": "yellow", "qty": 11, "vendor": ["A", "B"]}
      {"_id": 6, "color": "pink", "qty": 5, "vendor": ["C"]}
      {"_id": 7, "color": "green", "qty": 8,"vendor": ["B", "C"]}
      {"_id": 8, "color": "orange", "qty": 7, "vendor": ["A", "D"]}

.. _logical:

Logical
-------

The logical operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Logical Operator
     - 
      
   * - ``and()``

>      - Joins filters with a logical AND and selects documents that match the conditions of both filters.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: we could use monospace for the logical operators to identify them as terms rather than grammatical conjunctions.

   * - ``or()``
     - Joins filters with a logical OR and selects documents that match the conditions of either filters.
      
   * - ``not()``

>      - Inverts the effect of a query expression and selects documents that do not match the filter.

Reviewer 2: Inverts might not be the most clear term to use. I think you can convey the meaning of the sentence with just the second half: "Selects the documents that do not match the filter".

     
   * - ``nor()``
     - Joins filters with a logical NOR and selects documents that fail to match both filters.

The following code snippet shows how to use a logical filter:

.. code-block:: java
   
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.*;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>

   collection.find(<logical filter>);

.. example::

   The following example creates a filter that selects documents where
   the value of the ``qty`` field is greater than ``8`` or the value

>    of the ``color`` field equals ``"pink"`` in the paint_purchaces collection: 

Reviewer 2: For values, let's try to stick with using quotes and no monospace. E.g. "8" and "pink".
Also, remember to keep monospace formatting on collection names.

      import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.and;
      // <MongoCollection setup code here>

      Bson existsComparison = and(exists("qty"), nin("qty", 5, 8));
      List<Document> results = new ArrayList<>();
      collection.find(existsComparison).into(results);
      for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
      }

   The Bson renders as:

   .. code-block:: none
      :copyable: false
   
      {
         "qty" :
         [
            { "$exists" : true,
            { "$nin" : [5, 8] }
         ]
      }

   The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:
   
   .. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
      
      {"_id": 2, "color": "purple", "qty": 10, "vendor": ["C", "D"]}
      {"_id": 4, "color": "white", "qty": 6, "vendor": ["D"]}
      {"_id": 5, "color": "yellow", "qty": 11, "vendor": ["A", "B"]}
      {"_id": 8, "color": "orange", "qty": 7, "vendor": ["A", "D"]}

.. _evaluation:

Evaluation
----------

An ``evaluation`` filter to match documemts with an expression.

The evaluation operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Evaluation Operator

>      - 

Reviewer 2: We should describe what's in this column to clarify.

      
   * - ``mod()``

>      - Performs a modulo operation on the value of a field and selects documents with a specified result.

Reviewer 2: You use "matches" in the other descriptions but "selects" here, is there a difference, or should they be the same for consistency?

   * - ``regex()``
     - Selects documents where values match a specified regular expression.
      
   * - ``text()``
     - Selects documemts matching a full-text search expression.
     
   * - ``where()``
     - Matches documents that satisfy a JavaScript expression.

> 

Reviewer 2: I noticed the first two mention "specified" -- are these different, or should they also use "specified" for consistency?

The following code snippet shows how to use an evaluation filter:

.. code-block:: java
   
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.*;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>

   collection.find(<evaluation filter>);

.. example::

   The following example selects documents that have a ``color`` field
   containing the term ``green`` in the paint_purchaces collection:

   .. code-block:: java
      
      import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.text;

      // <MongoCollection setup code here>

      Bson textComparison = text("green");
      List<Document> results = new ArrayList<>();
      collection.find(textComparison).into(results);
      for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
      }

   The Bson renders as:

   .. code-block:: none
      :copyable: false
   
      { 
         "text" : "green"
      }

   The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:
   
   .. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
      
      {"_id": 7, "color": "green", "qty": 8,"vendor": ["B", "C"]}

   Available with MongoDB 3.2, a version 3 text index allows case-sensitive

>    and diacritic-sensitive searches.

Reviewer 2: Let's omit any information about features before MongoDB server v3.6 since those are unsupported now. You could also describe what you're about to show and what a diacritic-sensitive search is.

   .. code-block:: java

      text("green", TextSearchOptions().caseSensitive(true))

   .. code-block:: java

      text("green", TextSearchOptions().diacriticSensitive(true))

.. _bitwise:

Bitwise
-------

The bitwise query operators include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Logical Operator

>      - Selects documents where

Reviewer 2: Do you have any objections to using "Matches" here which might be more consistent? I think we should try to use similar terminology when referring to the same thing when possible. If you changed this to "matches", the descriptions could read something like this:
"when the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. 1)."

      
   * - ``bitsAllSet()``
     - the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. 1).

   * - ``bitsAllClear()``
     - the specified bits of a field are clear (i.e. 0).
      
   * - ``bitsAnySet()``
     - at least one of the specified bits of a field are set (i.e. 1).
     
   * - ``bitsAnyClear()``
     - at least one of the specified bits of a field are clear (i.e. 0).

The following code snippet shows how to use a bitwise filter:

.. code-block:: java
   
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.*;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>

   collection.find(<bitwise filter>);

.. example::

   The following example selects documents that have a bitField field
   with bits set at positions of the corresponding bitmask 50 (i.e.
   00110010) in the binary_numbers collection: 

   .. code-block:: java
      
      import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.bitsAllSet;

      // <MongoCollection setup code here>

>       Bson bitsComparison = bitsAllSet(1, 5);

Reviewer 2: I think there might be some confusion here in what parameters you provide this method. For example, how do we know this is for field "a"? And isn't a bitmask of 5 equivalent to 0x101 which doesn't match the results in the example? 

Could you check the API documentation and correct it? Also, it could be useful to mention something about the parameters in the descriptions in the table above.

Author: should I add a column in each table for the parameters of each method?

Reviewer 2: It might be useful at some point to link these to API documentation, but can you explain examples that might not be self-explanatory like this one? From this API documentation page, unless I'm missing something, I'm not sure this will compile since the first argument should be a String:
https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/4.2/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/Filters.html#bitsAllSet(java.lang.String,long)

      List<Document> results = new ArrayList<>();
      collection.find(bitsComparison).into(results);
      for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
      }

   The Bson renders as:

   .. code-block:: none
      :copyable: false
   
      { 
         "a": 
            { 
               "$bitsAllSet": [ 1, 5 ] 
            } 
      }

   The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:
   
   .. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false
      
      { _id: 9, a: 54, binaryValue: "00110110" }
      { _id: 12, a: 102, binaryValue: "01100110" }

.. _geospatial:

Geospatial
----------

> 

Reviewer 2: For each of these sections, I think we had discussed adding a brief description (one or two sentences) as well as links to the sections that don't exist yet. For the latter, could you pretend a link exists and substitute the link directive with "(TODO: link to CRUD geospatial section)"? Eventually, maybe we can move the tables you've created here to those sections and cross link between the two to reduce the duplicated content.

Author: I ended up taking them out since https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/operator/query/ doesn't have descriptions for them either.  Would you prefer if I do add a brief description?

Reviewer 2: Sorry, not sure what you mean. Maybe it would be easier to understand if I could see your changes (make sure to push them to your branch). If you're referring to not being able to find descriptions for geospatial filters, I see descriptions on both the page you linked as well as https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/geospatial-queries/

Reviewer 2: Not sure if you noticed this comment, so bumping it just in case ^

The geospatial operator methods include:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Comparison Operator
     - Matches
      
   * - ``geoWithin()``

>      - Selects documents containing a GeoJSON geometry field that falls within within a bounding GeoJSON geometry.

Reviewer 2: Since we use "matches" in the column header, this reads as "Matches selects documents..." Could you update this for correctness and consistency?

      
   * - ``geoWithinPolygon()``
     - Selects documents containing a grid coordinates field that exist within the specified polygon.

   * - ``geoWithinCenter()``
     - Selects documents containing a grid coordinates field that exist within the specified circle.

   * - ``geoWithinCenterSphere()``
     - Selects geometries containing a geospatial data field (GeoJSON or legacy coordinate pairs) that exist within the specified circle, using spherical geometry.

   * - ``geoIntersects()``
     - Selects geometries that intersect with a GeoJSON geometry. The 2dsphere index supports $geoIntersects.

   * - ``near()``
     - Returns geospatial objects in proximity to a point. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support $near.

   * - ``nearSphere()``
     - Returns geospatial objects in proximity to a point on a sphere. Requires a geospatial index. The 2dsphere and 2d indexes support $nearSphere.

The following code snippet shows how to use a geospatial filter:

.. code-block:: java
   
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Filters.*;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>

   collection.find(<geospatial filter>);

.. example::

>    TThe following example creates a filter that selects documents where the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The following example creates a filter that matches documents in which the
```

      // <MongoCollection setup code here>

      Polygon square = new Polygon(Arrays.asList(new Position(0, 0), 
                                            new Position(4, 0), 
                                            new Position(4, 4), 
                                            new Position(0, 4),
                                            new Position(0, 0)));
   
      Bson geoWithinComparison = geoWithin("point", square));
      collection.find(geoWithinComparison);
      List<Document> results = new ArrayList<>();
      collection.find(bitsComparison).into(results);
      for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
      }

   The Bson renders as:

   .. code-block:: none
      :copyable: false
   
      {
         "point": {
            $geoWithin: {
               $geometry: {
                  type: "Polygon",
                  coordinates: [ [ [ 0, 0 ], [ 4 , 0 ], [ 4, 4 ], [ 0, 4 ], [0 , 0] ] ]
               }
            }
         }
      }

   The output of the above code snippet should look something like this:
   
   .. code-block:: json
      :copyable: false

      { _id: 13, type: "Point", coordinates: [ 2,2 ] }

>       { _id: 15, type: "Point", coordinates: [ 1,3 ] }

Reviewer 2: I don't know the answer offhand, but would these be formatted with no spaces between numbers in the array?
